Title: 0 to 1
Date: 2020-08-20 14:09
Tags: meta, blog, software, music, career, life, xr
Slug: 0-to-1

![Facebook badge](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/-12nlQ1cSzMZX43_UPC5D28VNZGh-mLvOPl3yrkqv_oGJTFJ1Vzp7W84Wck5FGcYsfeXLsBVqyX-_hZD-i4FnaiiH7nsGMti2utT06gpVwIIzcsNurCQvBwLGogM-uDdEOz9KJqor0I "Facebook badge")

8 years ago London was hosting the Olympics and I met[ Philip
Su](https://www.facebook.com/the.philip.su) for the first time at[
Browns in Covent Garden](https://www.facebook.com/brownscoventgarden/)
to talk about the engineering office Facebook was planning to open in
London. By the end of this year Facebook London will have thousands of
people working in technical roles. It was an amazing ride.

Along the way I was lucky enough to work with some incredible
engineers to help build numerous things that I would have considered
impossible 8 years ago:[ a static analyser which defies the halting
problem to finds bugs in massive code bases in
minutes](https://fbinfer.com/);[ immersive multi-user VR experiences
that support hundreds of mutually aware people running on a mobile
phone strapped to your
face](https://www.oculus.com/experiences/gear-vr/1555304044520126)
and[ a working siege engine built overnight on the roof of a
castle](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4DAAFR8goOw).

[8 years on it feels like mission
accomplished](https://www.facebook.com/careers/life/a-day-in-the-life-of-jim-an-engineering-manager-at-oculus-london). Despite
the [incredible recent
events](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19_pandemic), I can’t
remember the last time I heard anyone question the future of Facebook
London engineering: I can move on and it will continue to succeed
without me, so that’s what I’m doing.

Recent events have also made me think more about where I want to spend
my time. In the near future I’m going to [spend more time with my
family and friends in
Brighton](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLuYiVrLoFA4N1KneYJJeYorn6iTu-_ufP),
[more time supporting XR](https://xrbrighton.earth/), more time making
[music ](https://soundcloud.com/jimpurbrick)and
[software](https://github.com/jimpurbrick) and then, eventually, some
time thinking about what comes next. If you’d like to make some music
or software with me, [let](mailto:jim@jimpurbrick.com)
[me](https://facebook.com/jimpurbrick)
[know](https://twitter.com/jimpurbrick).
