Title: A Past And Present Future Of Work
Date: 2020-09-30 16:51
Tags: MMORPG, SocialVR, Second Life, EVE Online, VR, Facebook, Oculus
Slug: a-past-and-present-future-of-work

![Studio Blighty](https://live.staticflickr.com/2414/3533472060_6d39b0329f_b.jpg "Studio Blighty")

Over the last few years I’ve spent a lot of time helping people new to
virtual worlds learn how they work. Over the last few weeks I’ve been
sharing a series of short posts on some of the high level concepts I
covered which will hopefully be useful to other people new to virtual
worlds. [The previous
post](https://jimpurbrick.com/2020/09/23/small-places-loosely-joined/)
talked about how you can structure the world so that everyone can move
around easily to find everything that they want. This post talks about
how virtual worlds can become the workplace of the future.

<div class="flex-video"><iframe width="640" height="360"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AtyE5qOB4gw"
frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe></div>

Not long after joining the Oculus Rooms team a couple of years ago, I
first heard [Michael
Abrash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Abrash) talk about his
dream of a virtual office where he could collaborate with colleagues
from around the world in VR. My immediate thought was that of course
this would happen: I had already done it very successfully for
years. This note is an attempt to distribute that past future more
evenly.

When I started working at [Linden Lab](https://www.lindenlab.com/) in
2005 I was living in the UK and working from home. After a day of
hacking on[ Second Life](https://secondlife.com/)'s server
infrastructure I would spend several hours every evening in Second
Life working with my colleagues who were in San Francisco in real
life.

One of the first engineers to arrive at the San Francisco office was
Zero Linden who was a big fan of pair programming. As soon as he was
online we would meet in our virtual office where our avatars would sit
next to each other and we would discuss software architecture and test
cases in Second Life while we used a shared editor to hack on C++ or
Python in another window . Over time we started using our virtual
office space to host office hours for other engineers with questions
about the Second Life server and our initially spartan virtual office
grew to include experiments in using Second Life to visualize our work
and parts of the Second Life software architecture.

<div class="flex-video"><iframe width="640" height="360"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/MxsK8hpNPjk"
frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe></div>

After an hour or so of pair programming with Zero to hand off the code
I'd been working on during the UK daytime, other Lindens would start
arriving at the San Francisco office and we would start using Second
Life for larger scale team meetings. Even without tracked headsets,
the 3D positional audio and instantly recognizable avatars made these
meetings more successful than video conferencing. Because everyone was
in Second Life together I felt far more present than I typically do
using video conferencing to join a meeting in Menlo Park as the lone
participant in London. Everyone was an equal participant in every
meeting.

I expect this to be a common model for collaboration between remote
workers in VR: the virtual space provides a forum for communication,
conversation and annotation while existing applications, editors and
tools are brought in to VR to provide familiar and powerful ways to
create content together. I'm particularly excited about the
possibilities for people to collaborate on very complex problems at
the limit of human comprehension like large scale software development
which are often hard to discuss in real life, but possible to
visualize, understand and explore together in VR.

While the creators of virtual worlds are likely more open to meeting
in them than average, I can imagine many people with remote colleagues
also being open to using virtual worlds to allow everyone to
contribute more effectively in team meetings. Virtual worlds will be
especially valuable in meetings which require a lot of media
presentation or recording as that can be more easily automated than in
real life.

As Linden Lab became more international with offices in Brighton and
Singapore we started holding regular company all hands in Second
Life. While these were often plagued by technical troubles due to the
high attendance pushing the software to its limits, they were also
great opportunities for remote employees to meet people they might not
have seen for months and for serendipitous conversations to occur in
the hallways outside the conference rooms, just as they do in real
life.

This is also a use case I expect to become important in VR and
something that is already better supported by [Oculus
Venues](https://www.oculus.com/experiences/quest/2464560730245504/)
than it was in Second Life. After attending OC3 and OC4 in person I
was disappointed that I couldn't justify the time away from my family
to attend Oculus Connect 5, but delighted that I could attend in
Oculus Venues where I had a better view of[
](https://fb.workplace.com/profile.php?id=100015366546806&eid=ARBN1fh0CysUov2IQzEtQ5iyrc3_ki1SwgAgkmHLVyz0seb6_lzp0I4HYIxjMSVsclzYY50fS6oj8mFU)Hugo
speaking on stage than I'd had in real life. I am sure that VR can
enable myriad opportunities for networking and serendipitous
conversations which don't happen when people just catch up on
conference talks on[
](https://l.workplace.com/l.php?u=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do7OpS7pZ5ok%26list%3DPLL2xVXGs1SP6KJXPd8n1Sxj8IpEQpOyy_&h=AT0i2Yw6lHYzITJIr8zuhGhfBwsCmHaQQtM5K8sjEnFFkpBAhGm5NuNlbloyv6iGk_Wlg_RP3of6aq0aabIzyI-FdrKei9xC3-13tTsAplqd-eI50ZwOyb5mCjSXtrE0nTjv7xly8gtYuxSg)YouTube.

After working for years both on and in Second Life it is clear to me
that using VR for work collaboration is both very valuable and very
possible. It's also clear that there is a lot of overlap between the
social and work opportunities for VR. The Linden Lab all hands in
Second Life looked a lot like the[ Accelerating Change conference in
Second
Life](https://slfuturesalon.blogs.com/second_life_future_salon/2006/01/doug_engelbart__1.html). The
office hours held for Linden Lab engineers were so successful I
started holding office hours for people building in Second Life. The
time I spent[ working with Osprey Therian on Combat
Cards](http://jimpurbrick.com/2013/12/15/osprey-therian/) in Second
Life was just as rewarding and productive as the time I spent with
Zero Linden working on scripting APIs. A lot of the most valuable use
cases for VR will combine work and fun and we should beware false
dichotomies. Any Metaverse worthy of the name will be both the future
of work and the future of fun.