Title: Always Watching The Watchers
Date: 2010-05-01 15:44
Tags: music
Slug: always-watching-watchers

</p>

On May 17th, the first [100 robots][] single, [Always Watching][], will
be released online via [Amazon][], iTunes, emusic, Rhapsody, napster,
spotify and many more digital outlets.

</p>

Always Watching has been one of the most satisfying projects I’ve ever
worked on. Using a commodity <span class="caps">PC</span> and the
incredible [Ableton Live][] music production software, [Max][] and I
were able to compose, record, arrange and produce the track, sharing
versions online using the free and open source [Subversion][] revision
control software and downloading freely reusable samples from the
amazing [freesound][] online sample site.

</p>

With the music done we were able to produce a
<span class="caps">DIY</span> video for the track, filmed and directed
by our friend [Chris Cole][] again using digital technology that would
have been out of reach of anyone but film studios a few years ago. After
an incredibly fun day running around Brighton recording shots we could
again get additional material from the internet, in this case footage of
internet luminaries Chris Anderson, John Battelle, Sherry Turkle and Lee
Tien interviewed about online privacy for the
[<span class="caps">BBC</span> virtual revolution][] series which were
released online with a permissive license that allowed us to reuse them.

</p>

With the video in the can it was time to promote the track online using
the social network sites [MySpace][], [Facebook][] [Sound Cloud][] and
[Last.fm][], make a remix pack available via [Bit Torrent][] and sell
the track via [Zimbalam][], a site that that makes music available for
sale on all of the major online stores, using artwork that we found on
[Flickr][] and that Rainer Messerklinger kindly let us use.

</p>

It really has been an amazing and eye-opening experience. Using cheap
digital technology, the internet and a <span class="caps">DIY</span>
spirit we have been able to create, promote and sell our music to the
world and while I don’t expect to make a ton of money from selling the
track, being able to sell it is important.

</p>

Computers and the internet have put the means of production back in to
the hands of musicians, creatives and other workers in the digital
economy. Whereas musicians in decades past would have had to rely on
recording facilities and production and distribution chains owned and
controlled by major labels, musicians now can choose to do it all
themselves and potentially get much better deals. Historically record
deals have been incredibly unfair on artists who have to pay for their
recordings from their royalties but still don’t own their recordings
once they are paid for. Right now sites like Zimbalam, TuneCore and
<span class="caps">CD</span> Baby are fiercely competing to provide the
best deal to musicians who are doing it themselves.

</p>

The last time ownership of the means of production changed hands from
workers to factory owners the [disenfranchised rose up to smash the
machines][] until they were suppressed by the government. This time the
[disintermediated][] are turning to the government to defend and enforce
the old business models by crippling the new machines that are handing
back the means of production to the workers.

</p>

Always Watching is a song about biometrics, click tracking, online
privacy, [Phorm][], governmental data loss, corruption and the
increasingly Orwellian surveillance state. Even while we’ve been
recording it the state has rushed through the [Digital Economy Bill][]
which further endangers our digital rights and freedoms. With a general
election coming up, it’s even more important to always watch
the watchers.

</p>

  [100 robots]: http://100robots.com
  [Always Watching]: http://soundcloud.com/100robots/always-watching
  [Amazon]: http://www.amazon.co.uk/Always-Watching/dp/B003GNG89U/
  [Ableton Live]: http://www.ableton.com/
  [Max]: http://webcrisps.wordpress.com/
  [Subversion]: http://subversion.apache.org/
  [freesound]: http://www.freesound.org/
  [Chris Cole]: http://vimeo.com/user3114905
  [<span class="caps">BBC</span> virtual revolution]: http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/digitalrevolution/
  [MySpace]: http://www.myspace.com/onehundredrobots
  [Facebook]: http://www.facebook.com/pages/100-robots/117538501400
  [Sound Cloud]: http://soundcloud.com/100robots/
  [Last.fm]: http://www.last.fm/music/100+robots
  [Bit Torrent]: http://www.demonoid.com/files/details/2226785/31654585/
  [Zimbalam]: http://www.zimbalam.co.uk/
  [Flickr]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/mikrotom/3965646978/
  [disenfranchised rose up to smash the machines]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luddite
  [disintermediated]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disintermediation
  [Phorm]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phorm
  [Digital Economy Bill]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_Economy_Act_2010
