Title: #bandcampday
Date: 2016-03-26 18:59
Tags: music,diy,storybird,point mass,music industry,culture,punk

![Black barn mixing desk](https://40.media.tumblr.com/13975963d22df530b39b4847fc074fbf/tumblr_nwb9p6k9OZ1uz3ez3o1_1280.jpg "Black barn mixing desk")

I love record shops. Whenever I had pocket money it would go on
[Metallica](https://metallica.com/) and
[Nirvana](http://www.nirvana.com/) CDs bought from [Our
Price](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Our_Price) or black t-shirts to
match. When I lived in Nottingham I bought [Boards Of
Canada](http://www.boardsofcanada.com) CDs from the same
[Selectadisc](http://www.selectadisc.co.uk/) that my Dad bought a rare
[Fairport Convention](http://www.fairportconvention.com/) single from
decades before and the latest [Ninja Tune](http://ninjatune.net/) or
[Rudy Van Gelder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rudy_Van_Gelder)
edition [Blue Note](http://www.bluenote.com/) records for Â£5 from
[Fopp](http://www.fopp.com/). While working at Linden Lab in San
Francisco my brother and I gorged on releases by the
[Quannum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quannum_Projects) collective
hungrily snatched up from [Amoeba
Music](http://www.amoeba.com/). While walking home from
[BrewDog](https://www.brewdog.com/bars/uk/brighton) with
[Alistair](http://alistairriddoch.org/) recently, we were both
enthusing about the amazing [Resident](http://www.resident-music.com/)
in Brighton. I commented that it was a shame that even Resident didn't
have room for the incredible [Tera Melos](http://teramelos.net/) who I
had just seen at [The Green Door
Store](http://www.thegreendoorstore.co.uk/) after finding their music
along with [Cleft](http://www.cleftband.co.uk), [100
Onces](https://100onces.bandcamp.com/) and [many
others](https://bandcamp.com/pointmass) on
[Bandcamp](https://bandcamp.com/).

I also love making music. While I was still at school I recorded
Timeless Mind songs on a Fostex X-28 cassette 4-track. When I got to
Nottingham I watched [4hero](http://4hero.co.uk) coax amazing sounds
out of an Atari while I projected virtual worlds on the wall behind
them, tried to convince Cubase to sync MIDI parts to audio on an
underpowered PC, shut my brother in my spare room until he recorded
saxophone parts for Vanishing Trick and eventually saw some of my
music in Selectadisc thanks to DJ SS and [Formation
Records](http://formationrecordsuk.com/). Computers democratized music
production and unleashed a Cambrian explosion of DIY musical
creativity that can't fit in to any record shop, but can fit on the
Internet. When Resident runs out of room, Bandcamp keeps
going. Bandcamp also allows musicians to charge a [fair
price](http://www.informationisbeautiful.net/visualizations/how-much-do-music-artists-earn-online-2015-remix/)
for their music and takes a fair percentage for their services: an
important consideration in a world where making money as a musician is
becoming increasingly hard.

A couple of days ago I was reminded of the conversation with Alistair
when I started seeing mentions of this year's
[#recordstoreday](https://twitter.com/hashtag/recordstoreday?lang=en-gb). #recordstoreday
is great for record stores; Bandcamp is great for the rest of music;
why isn't there a #bandcampday? On the 23rd of April, the week after
you spend the afternoon buying exclusive slabs of shiny black vinyl at
your local record shop, why not spend an afternoon uncovering some of
the musical treasures on Bandcamp? I hope to have the first [Story
Bird](http://storybird.band/) album and new [Point
Mass](https://pointmass.bandcamp.com/) music finished by then; I have
some old Vanishing Trick tracks I can release and if I can find a good
tape recorder I might even be able to upload some of the Timeless Mind
recordings from 22 years ago. If you're a musician, do you have any
hidden gems you could release on the 23rd of April? If so, join [this
event](https://www.facebook.com/events/691558950987175/) and let's see
how much music we can release on the first ever
[#bandcampday](https://twitter.com/hashtag/bandcampday?lang=en-gb).