Title: Bouncaline
Date: 2009-11-03 20:28
Tags: design, education, game, programming, software
Slug: bouncaline

Last week I took some time off to spend with Luke and Natty during half
term and we spent Wednesday having a lovely time finishing off a game we
started a couple of months ago: Bouncaline.

</p>

Luke has been interested in making games for a while: he made a level
for the [You’re The Boss][] game at the [Radiator festival][] in
Nottingham in 2006 — when he was 3!

</p>

More recently Luke started designing a game that I was helping him put
together in [Game Maker][]. He drew lots of backgrounds and characters
that we scanned in and there were vague ideas about treasure hunting
game play, but it felt a bit like Luke was biting off more than he
could chew.

</p>

So, when Luke and Natty inherited a trampoline over the summer I
suggested that we build a bouncing game and we started building it with
[Scratch][], an educational programming environment that I’d been
meaning to experiment with since seeing that it had been [ported to
Second Life][].

</p>

Scratch has a very simple model based on plugging together blocks that
is similar to the [Lego Mindstorms][] environment. Luke quickly got the
hang of it and built a significant portion of the logic with just a few
leading questions. Like Mindstorms and <span class="caps">LSL</span> it
uses multiple flows of control within the same scripted object for
complex behaviour, which can take some getting used to when making an
object that simultaneously waits to be touched and for a timer,
for example.

</p>

In some respects I wish Scratch was a little purer — although message
passing concurrency is possible, it’s very easy to share state between
objects — something we shouldn’t be encouraging the programmers of
tomorrow to do. It’s also harder to do multiple levels or screens than
with Game Maker, but given Luke’s propensity to lose himself in Zelda
style epics, the tight focus might help learn the basics of logic.

</p>

Overall it’s a delightfully easy and rewarding environment to use. After
spending a couple of hours finishing the logic, we went in to the garden
to take pictures of the trampoline and Luke and Natty striking poses for
the animations and quickly got them imported in to Scratch along with
some very cute drawings and sound effects by Luke.

</p>

Scratch also makes it very easy to share your work on the web, allowing
Luke to proudly show off his handy work to his Grandparents over the
weekend and for me to proudly share the game with you here. I hope you
enjoy Bouncaline!

</p>

Use the left and right arrow keys to move and try to collect the
food.[Learn more about this project][]

</p>

  [You’re The Boss]: https://blogs.secondlife.com/community/features/blog/2006/01/07/remix-you-re-the-boss
  [Radiator festival]: http://radiator-festival.org/
  [Game Maker]: http://www.yoyogames.com/gamemaker/
  [Scratch]: http://scratch.mit.edu/
  [ported to Second Life]: http://s4sl.blogspot.com/
  [Lego Mindstorms]: http://mindstorms.lego.com/default.aspx
  [Learn more about this project]: http://scratch.mit.edu/projects/jimpurbrick/737163
