Title: Creating A Safe Environment For People In VR
Date: 2016-10-31 23:28
Tags: Second Life, EVE Online, MMORPG, MUD, Virtual World, VR

<div class="flex-video widescreen"><iframe src="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JEWHaDt-qiE" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen=""></iframe></div>

I was very happy that [Oculus](https://www.oculus.com/) found time at
[OC3](https://www.oculusconnect.com/) to host a panel on creating a
safe environment for people in VR. As social VR becomes more popular
over the next few years it will quickly have to learn how to keep
people safe together in shared environments. Some of the challenges
are new: tracked hands make it easier to violate other avatars and
gesture abusively without resorting to custom animations or scripts;
invading personal space is a much bigger issue and increased presence
makes all experiences more visceral for better or worse. Some novel
solutions have already been developed for these challenges, notably
the personal space bubbles developed for
[Bigscreen](http://bigscreenvr.com/) and widely used in other social
VR experiences. However, a lot of these problems have been experienced
in virtual worlds since [MUD1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MUD1)
launched nearly 40 years ago. I was particularly struck by how the
experiences with filtering, reporting and governance in [Altspace
VR](https://altvr.com/) reminded me of the story of
[LambdaMOO](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LambdaMOO) becoming a
self-governing community told by [Julian
Dibbell](http://juliandibbell.com/) in [My Tiny
Life](http://www.lulu.com/shop/julian-dibbell/my-tiny-life-crime-and-passion-in-a-virtual-world/ebook/product-17492539.html). People
like Julian, [Richard Bartle](http://www.youhaventlived.com/qblog/)
and [Raph Koster](http://www.raphkoster.com/) have been wrestling with
and thinking about these problems for decades. The pioneers of this
generation of VR should make sure they learn from those experiences.