Title: crestmatic
Date: 2016-01-03 23:13
Tags: eve, ccp, technology, rest, web, api, travis, ci, tools, github

<div class="flex-video widescreen"><iframe src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/QMQOjUjrZIo" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen=""></iframe></div>

A year ago I gave a talk at [EVE Vegas](http://vegas.eveonline.com/)
about building RESTful CREST applications. My [#1
recommendation](https://youtu.be/QMQOjUjrZIo?t=697) was to specify
representations in requests, but that's hard to do when there is
little documentation on which representations are available and what
they contain.

Fortunately CREST is [self
describing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QMQOjUjrZIo&t=1369): you
just need to send an OPTIONS request to a CREST URI and the API will
send a list of methods and representations that can be used with that
URI. The data returned isnâ€™t in a standard format, so I built the
[crestschema](https://github.com/jimpurbrick/crestschema) library
which can convert the CREST format in to a more useful [JSON
schema](http://json-schema.org/latest/json-schema-core.html)
format. crestschema is designed to work both in browsers, in
applications like
[crestexplorer](https://github.com/jimpurbrick/crestexplorerjs), and
from [node](https://nodejs.org/) in applications like
[crestschemaspider](https://github.com/jimpurbrick/crestschema/blob/master/crestschemaspider.js)
which can crawl the CREST API to find representations to convert. The
converted schemas can then be used with wide variety of [software,
libraries and languages](http://json-schema.org/implementations.html)
to validate data from the live CREST API, generate parsers or
automatically generate documentation.

With the schemas converted it's easy to build
[crestmatic](https://github.com/jimpurbrick/crestmatic) which uses
crestschema and [matic](https://github.com/mattyod/matic) to generate
the documentation. Adding a [travis](https://travis-ci.org/) step to
publish the generated documentation to
[gh-pages](http://jimpurbrick.com/crestmatic/) and wiring up
[nightli.es](https://nightli.es/) to trigger a build every night are
the final setps to ensure that the documentation is automatically kept
up to date. Please feel free to submit a pull request if you'd like to
see some changes or just donate some ISK to Capt Out if you find the
[documentation](http://jimpurbrick.com/crestmatic/) or
[code](https://github.com/jimpurbrick/crestmatic) useful.
