Title: dConstructing dConstruct
Date: 2008-09-18 12:03
Tags: brighton, development, networks, social, software, web
Slug: dconstructing-dconstruct

A couple of weeks ago the great and the good of web development
descended on Brighton for the wonderful [clearleft][] produced
[dconstruct][] conference and once again I’m glad I went along.

</p>

Steven Johnson kicked off with a talk about how Dr. John Snow’s
innovative data visualization of a cholera epidemic and the wisdom of
dead crowds helped convince people of the water borne nature of the
disease. It was an interesting story, but it mostly ended up being a
plug for [his book][] and geoblogging aggregator [outside.in][].

</p>

Next up, [Aleks Krotoski][] talked about how games had spent decades
creating incredibly compelling user experiences in silos without much
contact with each other the academic <span class="caps">HCI</span>
community or the web. Meanwhile the web is very interested in creating
similarly sticky experiences using virtual rewards to encourage
participation. Aleks’ conclusion was that the two communities should
talk and I agree.

</p>

Daniel Burka talked about similar themes in his talk about the evolution
of [Digg][]. The most interesting anecdotes where about how top diggers
started off as a good incentive, but became a disincentive when new
users saw how unachievable the scores had become and how the
recommendation engine is now a good way to encourage some of Digg’s
passive audience to get involved.

</p>

Matt Jones and Matt Bidaulph talked about their successful Silicon
Roundabout startup [dopplr][]. Jones talked about visual design and
delighters which sounded a lot like Alek’s virtual rewards in games.
<span class="caps">SL</span> uber-hacker [Bidaulph][]talked made another
gaming analogy, talking about how embedding dopplr in other sites and
vice versa achieves a similar seamless experience to streaming maps in
games: removing the load screens and jumps that used to bedevil console
games and still are the normal experience when using the web. He also
talked about the importance of using message queues and asynchronicity
in services like dopplr which pull information from across the web.

</p>

[Joshua Porter][]‘s talk on Leveraging Cognitive Bias in Social Design
was the stand out talk for me. He talked about exploiting people’s
tendency to pattern match to generalise isolated positive case studies
on web sites and on framing account creation as something to do to avoid
losing features rather than something that gains features as a way to
play on the tendency to value losses greater than gains. His description
of the how the 9x mismatch between customers (who over value the
application they already have by 3 times) and developers (who over value
the application they have developed by 3 times) creates a huge barrier
to application adoption was particularly interesting.

</p>

[Tantek Celik][]‘s talk about using hCard and rel=me links to create
portable, auto-updating social network profiles and data to reduce the
fatigue induced by inviting all of your friends to many social networks
was the most practical session of the day. I’m going to try playing
around with rel=me links and Google’s social graph
<span class="caps">API</span> here soon.

</p>

[Jeremy Keith][] gave a [grandiose talk][] to end the day which wove
together psychohistory from [Asimov’s Foundation Series][] with
[Critical Mass][] and [The Wisdom of Crowds][] to talk about how network
effects and power law distributions cause some social software to
explode in popularity while others wither, but that despite [The Tipping
Point][] being sold in business sections as a how-to book, it is
fundamentally a retrospective and that predicting or engineering tipping
points or network effects is notoriously hard. It was a great talk and
the conclusion that social software is more of a lottery than a science
is valid, but still: you have to be [in it to win
it] (http://secondlife.com).

</p>

  [clearleft]: http://clearleft.com/
  [dconstruct]: http://2008.dconstruct.org
  [his book]: http://www.theghostmap.com/
  [outside.in]: http://outside.in
  [Aleks Krotoski]: http://socialsim.wordpress.com/
  [Digg]: http://digg.com/
  [dopplr]: http://www.dopplr.com
  [Bidaulph]: http://www.hackdiary.com/
  [Joshua Porter]: http://bokardo.com/
  [Tantek Celik]: http://microformats.org/
  [Jeremy Keith]: http://adactio.com/
  [grandiose talk]: http://adactio.com/articles/1508/
  [Asimov’s Foundation Series]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foundation_series
  [Critical Mass]: http://www.philipball.com/
  [The Wisdom of Crowds]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wisdom_of_Crowds
  [The Tipping Point]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Tipping_Point
