Title: Evolving Develop
Date: 2009-07-20 23:41
Tags: development, facebook, games, mobile, online, social
Slug: evolving-develop

As usual I headed down to the Metropole on the sea front last week to
attend the annual [Develop conference][] in Brighton. Unusually, this
time I was attending the [Evolve day][] which shifts the focus from
console development to online, mobile and social games, which I had
helped create as part of the steering commitee. I was very impressed.

</p>

The first talk I attended was not strictly part of the evolve day: I
switched over to the [Games:Edu][] track to listen to [Alice Taylor][]
talk about her work building games for Channel 4. In a previous era,
Channel 4 spent £6 million a year on public service programming for
young people which ended up being shown in the mornings when the only
young people at home were off sick. In order to reach a wider audience
all of that money was switched to online programming and, because 14-19
year olds love them, games. Since then, Alice and Matt Locke have toured
the country commisioning small developers to develop games like
[Sneeze][], [Routes][], [1066][] and future games battling STIs in
privates and making science fun for girls with Ada Lovelace. It all
sounds like loads of fun and a great fit for Second Life (which already
has a fair amount of sex and science adventures of its own), but the key
here is availability. Alice is going where the kids are. Millions of
people play the Channel 4 games using technologies like Flash which are
ubiquitous: an order of magnitude more people than use Second Life
regularly or used to watch the telly from their sick beds.

</p>

Next up was “Browser Based Games Past Present Future” which sounded
perfect: which of the competing technologies is going to win the battle
for the 3D browser canvas, which should we use to make Second Life more
accessible to some of Alice’s teens? Unfortunately the retrospective and
predictive parts of the talk were extremely limited and the talk was
mostly a plug for [Pirate Galaxy][]: an online Java based [Eve][].
Luckily it looks incredibly well done. In particular the in world
economy which allows either time or money to be converted in to energy
and from their in to experience and eventually space ships looks very
slick: to begin with energy is plentiful and little is needed. Slowly
the screw is turned making the urge to invest in energy ever more
inticing. There are also limits on the amount of short cutting that can
be done by investing money, with game play still required to gain
experience which is needed to buy the best ships. It’s all a long step
forward from the experiments with economies and mudflation we grappled
with at <span class="caps">AGC</span>,
<span class="caps">SIGGRAPH</span> and on [Terra Nova][].

</p>

The highlight of the day for me was the talk by Kristian Segerstrale,
<span class="caps">CEO</span> and co-founder of [Playfish][] who make
some of the most successful games on Facebook, including [Pet
Society][]: a game which allows you to collect rainbow poos and is as
popular on Facebook as Rhianna and the Simpsons. Kristian talked about
how social games are different: no longer focused on creating paths for
solitary players to experience fear, horror, wonder and suspense, social
games are toolkits for cooperation, competition and expression for
friends. Social games have been responsible for most of the growth in
the games industry over the last year and while the Wii and Rock Band
have let friends gather and play together, games on social networks let
friends play together online. Where traditional games spend years and
millions in development and then launch with marketing splurges and
shelf space negitiated with retailers, social games might intially be
developed for 10s of thousands, sit on an infinite shelf and are
marketed virally through recommendations from friends. Where traditional
games rely on the intuition of a games designer who hopes to get it
right, social games rely on feedback. After launch social games are
deluged with information. Marketing is driven by numbers, buy buttons
are A/B tested with users, designers analyse play, further investment
and development desisions are based on usage, the skill is not in
intuitively knowing what players will like, but by mining and filtering
a slew of data to find out. Kristian’s talk felt a lot like Raph
Koster’s dinosaurs talk from a few years back: it even used a similar
meteor strike slide, however, this time around the small mammals weren’t
micro user generated virtual worlds but pets doing rainbow poos and
restaurant sims where you can hire your mum as chef.

</p>

It will be interesting to see how the small furry mammals evolve over
the coming years.

</p>

  [Develop conference]: http://www.develop-conference.com/developconference09/index.html
  [Evolve day]: http://www.develop-conference.com/developconference09/evolve.html
  [Games:Edu]: http://www.develop-conference.com/developconference09/games_edu.html
  [Alice Taylor]: http://www.wonderlandblog.com/wonderland/2009/07/develop-evolve.html
  [Sneeze]: http://www.routesgame.com/games/?challengeId=2
  [Routes]: http://www.routesgame.com/home/
  [1066]: http://www.channel4.com/history/microsites/0-9/1066/game/
  [Pirate Galaxy]: http://pirate-galaxy.gamigo.com/
  [Eve]: http://www.eveonline.com/
  [Terra Nova]: http://terranova.blogs.com/
  [Playfish]: http://www.playfish.com/
  [Pet Society]: http://www.playfish.com/?page=game_pets&pf_ref=x1030
