Title: Facebook Hackathons
Date: 2013-09-16 21:50
Tags: brighton, technology, culture, facebook

I've been a big fan of hackathons since one of the first Yahoo! Hack
Days I attended at Alexandra Palace was [struck by
lightning](http://www.wired.com/software/coolapps/news/2007/06/hackday). The
lightning caused the fire alarms to go off which opened the roof to
let the torrential rain pour on to hundreds of geeks and laptops. The
lighting strike also did a wonderful job of breaking the ice: within
minutes hundreds of attendees were huddling in the foyer talking about
the weather while others busily
[snapped](http://www.flickr.com/photos/joshrussell/557302741/) the few
stalwart hackers who cracked open umbrellas and continued to code
regardless.

Since then I've been to more Yahoo! Hack Days,
[Masheds](http://www.theguardian.com/media/pda/2008/jun/22/mashed2008wherebbcbacksta),
[Music Hack Days](http://musichackday.org/) and a [Euro Foo
Camp](http://wiki.oreillynet.com/eurofoo/index.cgi) and built a
[realtime multiplayer augmented reality submarine torpedo
game](http://andypiper.co.uk/2007/06/17/slorpedo/), an [augmented
virtual reality carbon emission
visualizer](http://jimpurbrick.com/2008/07/01/collaborative-user-generated-ambient-augmented-virtual-reality-visualisation-size-denmark/),
[turned snake in to a music
sequencer](http://jimpurbrick.com/2010/09/15/disco-snake/), put
together the [London Geek Community iPhone
Oscestra](http://jimpurbrick.com/2009/05/12/london-geek-community-iphone-oscestra/)
and learned a pile of technologies from
[Reactable](http://www.reactable.com/) and
[Processing](http://processing.org/) to
[Ubuntu](http://www.ubuntu.com/) and
[Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/). But no one hackathons like
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/hackathon).

Every six weeks hundreds of Facebook engineers get together on a
Thursday evening under a huge crane to form teams and hack through the
night on anything that isn't their normal job before taking the next
day off. It's a huge opportunity to learn, meet people, experiment,
try new ideas, learn new technologies, have fun and grow as a software
developer. Running hackathons this frequently, on this scale and
giving engineers a day off every six weeks is a huge, risky investment
for Facebook, but one that pays off handsomely: many of Facebook's
features, dozens of internal tools that I use every day and the open
source [Buck](http://facebook.github.io/buck/) build tool that I
currently work on were all started at hackathons.

Now [Facebook London](https://www.facebook.com/facebooklondon) has
taken hackathons even further by adding [cream teas at
midnight](http://instagram.com/p/ZY_qgtQAb0/) and taking them on tour.

<div class="flex-video widescreen"><<iframe src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/4DAAFR8goOw" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen=""></iframe></div>

I had enormous fun building a catapult on top of Whitstable Castle and
reenacting Monty Python and the Holy Grail at my first Facebook
hackathon and I'm looking forward to the next one at the Brighton Dome
on the 26th of September. The [Brighton
hackathon](http://www.brightondigitalfestival.co.uk/events/parse-by-the-sea/)
will be special as it's the first time we're opening a Facebook London
hackathon up to the public as part of the [Brighton Digital
Festival](http://www.brightondigitalfestival.co.uk/). The format will
be the same as a normal hackathon: it will start on Thursday night and
dozens of the super smart Facebook London engineers will be there
hacking on amazing projects until the next morning. The only
differences from a normal internal Facebook hackathon are that
external developers will be joining us and so we'll be building on top
of the [Facebook](https://developers.facebook.com/),
[Parse](https://www.parse.com/),
[Deezer](http://developers.deezer.com/), [Unity](http://unity3d.com/)
and [Withings](http://www.withings.com/) APIs rather than hacking on
secret Facebook code.

If that sounds fun and you can convince yourself or your boss that
taking a day off work to learn is worthwhile, send an email to
[brightonhack@fb.com](mailto:brightonhack@fb.com) and let us know that
you'd like to experience a Facebook hackathon for yourself. I'm
looking forward to seeing what we can build together.