Title: Following In My Father's Footsteps
Date: 2012-11-12 19:28
Tags: facebook, family, kodak, photos, scalability, service, sharing, social, software
Slug: following-my-fathers-footsteps

<a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/jimpurbrick/7865450260/" title="Tintin Hair by Jim Purbrick, on Flickr"><img src="http://farm9.staticflickr.com/8431/7865450260_1651236443.jpg" width="318" height="500" alt="Tintin Hair"></a>

From 2 years before I was born, until just before I started working on
Second Life at Linden Lab, my Dad worked at an innovative technology
company with a large consumer photography business: [Kodak][]. From
January next year I’ll be working at an innovative technology company
with a large consumer photography business: [Facebook][].

Looking at the march of technology from the perspectives of these
companies is amazing. I had a summer job building my first web
application for Kodak while I was studying Computer Science in
Nottingham and remember one of the researchers there joking that film
needed to last a long time as a roll would often have pictures of
christmas trees at either end with a summer holiday in the middle.
Photography was so expensive that people would only take a few dozen
pictures a year. Now we happily take a dozen pictures of our lunch,
wouldn’t consider buying a telephone without a built in multi-megapixel
camera and people upload hundreds of millions of images to Facebook
every day.

While the cost of creating photos has fallen to almost zero, their value
hasn’t. Some of my most enjoyable moments recently have been looking at
and commenting on the latest pictures of my brand new nephew, Charlie,
on Facebook and so it goes for Facebook’s other billion users. Photos
that are now so cheap to create that Kodak has [filed for chapter 11
protection][] become [social objects][] that are so valuable that
Facebook can host the photos for free and still make a good business
from advertising around the conversation.

Working for Facebook might seem like a strange move after a decade
working on 3D environments, but virtual worlds like [Second Life][] and
[<span class="caps">EVE</span>][] are also social spaces, just with
virtual nightclubs or space battles as the social objects. While 3D
environments allow more immersion than Facebook, the price is a much
higher barrier to entry. Although a few people from my family tried
Second Life while I worked at Linden Lab: most of my family use Facebook
already. My brother could create a gallery of pictures of my nephew in
Second Life and we could meet there to talk about them, but then most of
my nephew’s other aunts and uncles wouldn’t be able to join us. Ubiquity
trumps immersion. Virtual worlds like Second Life still need their iPod
moment if they’re going to cross the chasm from niche technology used by
gamers, early adopters and academics to become a mainstream
communication technology. Even though Second Life is free to use and
paid for by the publishers of the 3D content, it’s still too hard to
navigate for most people to use almost a decade after its launch.

Facebook is already used by a billion people to keep in touch, while
still evolving and developing at an incredible pace. I’m going to help
new uncles connect with new nephews around the world while working on
new technologies, which I think is going to make Facebook a fun and
rewarding place to work.

After that, who knows? My Dad’s working on some pretty amazing stuff
these days: if I keep following in his footsteps and change keeps
accelerating, the next thing is science fiction now, just as Second Life
and Facebook were in 1975.

  [Kodak]: http://www.kodak.com/
  [Facebook]: http://www.facebook.com/
  [filed for chapter 11 protection]: http://www.kodak.com/ek/US/en/Kodak_Transforms/Home.htm
  [social objects]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_objects
  [Second Life]: http://secondlife.com/
  [<span class="caps">EVE</span>]: http://www.eveonline.com/
