Title: GameCamp 2
Date: 2010-05-10 20:56
Tags: game, gamecamp, games, unconference
Slug: gamecamp-2

</p>

A couple of years ago, [Aleks Krotoski][] and a group of friends
spanning the web, games and technology fields decided to bring the
[FOOCamp][] and [BarCamp][] model of [unconferences][] to the world of
games and invited me along. I had a great time at the original
[GameCamp][] and missed it last year, so when I heard about the return
of [GameCamp][1] a couple of months ago I jumped on a ticket and eagerly
got on the train early on Saturday morning to participate in another
inspiring mind expanding day. I wasn’t disappointed.

</p>

The cultural differences between the worlds of games and the web we
touched on in a couple of sessions. “The <span class="caps">PC</span> Is
Dead, Long Live The <span class="caps">PC</span>” quickly turned in to a
discussion of open platforms like the <span class="caps">PC</span>
versus closed, console like channels. While the long term view was that
in 50 years open will prevail, the present sees controlled channels like
<span class="caps">XBLA</span>, the various Apple stores and Steam in
the ascendant. Some people will wait until titles are available on a
particular channel, suggesting that they offer some advantages in terms
of convenience, support or peace of mind. While this may be
<span class="caps">OK</span> where there is competition between
channels, games cannot be as easily distributed via multiple channels,
with platforms like Steam requiring relatively invasive changes to be
made to allow things like overlay menus to be displayed over game UIs.
Where choices between channels is not possible the whims of platform
controllers can make development extremely risky when policy changes or
simply under staffing can delay or scupper a release.

</p>

Steven Goodwin asked why open source can build Linux, but not games.
While the first answer is that Linux is a platform that can be shared by
anyone whereas games are more individual expressions of creativity, that
still begs the question why aren’t there more open source game
platforms? Games seem to slowly be moving towards more shared and open
infrastructure, but still lack the equivalent of the
[<span class="caps">LAMP</span>][] stack,
<span class="caps">HTML</span>, <span class="caps">CSS</span> and
JavaScript provide a shared web platform that allows web developers to
share tips and tricks at BarCamps.

</p>

Luckily, the inability for game developers to give talks on the
equivalent of squid configuration leaves room for lots of interesting
talks on higher level game design concepts. 2 of the most interesting
were hosted by [Margaret Robertson][], the first was on Curiosity — an
urge which is hard to explain in classical or behavioral economics, and
which is more powerful when the unknown is close and definite, a closed
box on a table that must be opened, than when the unknown is distant and
amorphous. The session turned in to an interesting comparison between
risk, where outcomes are known and curiosity when the outcome is
unknown, how both can be manipulated to make games more compelling and
whether that manipulation could be a force for good as well as evil. The
second of Margaret’s talks was about a forthcoming audio only binaural
iPhone game and the challenges of navigating a world without light,
which sounds fascinating, if hard.

</p>

[Tom Armitage][] hosted a session which asked “What Do Cows Call
Thermodynamics?”. The answer is, probably nothing, but it still affects
them. So it is with games, which are ultimately defined by their rules
and mechanics which can be used very creatively. The rule that Yorda is
afraid if you don’t hold her hand dramatically shapes your relationship
with her, the rule that you aim better while doing a stunt is what turns
action quake in to a John Woo simulator.

</p>

Another arc that ran through GameCamp 2 was a discussion about
creativity. Pictionary and Scrabble were used as examples of games that
foster creativity while players of World of Warcraft show amazing
creativity despite the game in a session that had many echos of the
Playfish talk at [Develop][] last year. At the other end of the
spectrum, a session on procedurally generated content asked could
algorithms create good content and if they could, how would they know?

</p>

My “Social Music Composition Games?” session at the end of the day
continued this arc. I first played Rock Band at the first GameCamp and
since have played it so much that I ended up starting 100 robots with
Max. Since then I’ve been playing with tools like [Ableton][] that have
very game like interfaces and games like [Lumines][] that have very
sequencer like interfaces. Could you use interfaces like these to build
games that do for music composition what Rock Band does for music
performance? If so, how would you judge the compositions? Something that
combined the interface of Lumines or the [Tenori-On][] and [Digg][] like
filtering and tagging might be very interesting here…

</p>

  [Aleks Krotoski]: http://alekskrotoski.com/
  [FOOCamp]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foo_Camp
  [BarCamp]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BarCamp
  [unconferences]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unconference
  [GameCamp]: http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2008/apr/17/what.the
  [1]: http://gamecamp.org.uk/
  [<span class="caps">LAMP</span>]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LAMP_%28software_bundle%29
  [Margaret Robertson]: http://lookspring.co.uk/
  [Tom Armitage]: http://infovore.org/
  [Develop]: http://jimpurbrick.com/2009/07/20/evolving-develop/
  [Ableton]: http://www.ableton.com/
  [Lumines]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lumines
  [Tenori-On]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tenori-on
  [Digg]: http://digg.com/
