Title: How (Not) to Build a Metaverse
Date: 2022-10-05 22:27
Tags: software, technology, vr, socialvr, design, virtualworlds, mmorpgs, crime, punishment, governance, abuse, safety, politics, philosophy, research, metaverse, secondlife
Slug: how-not-to-build-a-metaverse

Earlier in the year I helped Josh Sanburn and his team put together a
podcast series on building Second Life for the Wall Street Journal
called [“How To Build a
Metaverse”](https://www.wsj.com/podcasts/the-journal/introducing-how-to-build-a-metaverse/2016c79b-beb7-411d-9c5b-bb92afa3a528)
which I’m now really enjoying. It’s great to hear all of the amazing
stories about the origin of Second Life told by some of the most
amazing people I’ve ever worked with, but the stories I’m enjoying the
most are the stories I hadn’t heard before.

<iframe style="border-radius:12px" src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/episode/5I5n7jhueXc1iJxXgFCS4Q?utm_source=generator" width="100%" height="352" frameBorder="0" allowfullscreen="" allow="autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; fullscreen; picture-in-picture" loading="lazy"></iframe>

An incredible example from the most recent episode is the story of how
Second Life’s moderation began. Peter Alau tells the tale of how he
cribbed together a 20 paragraph Terms of Service using examples from
other virtual worlds before Philip stepped in and mandated that the
terms of service should be “Be Nice”.

My life was changed forever when I read Julian Dibbell’s article [“A
Rape In
Cyberspace”](http://www.juliandibbell.com/articles/a-rape-in-cyberspace/)
while working on the literature review for my PhD in Persistent
Virtual Environments at the University of Nottingham. The article made
me realize that virtual worlds were not just a collection of
interesting technical challenges, but that they could become real,
meaningful communities and that the people who met in them could be
hurt, just as they can in real life. Reading Dibbell’s article made me
want to work on commercial virtual worlds that enabled those real
human communities rather than experimental worlds that only existed as
technical proofs of concept. I left academia, started working in the
games industry, and quickly found the [Terra
Nova](https://terranova.blogs.com/ "Terra Nova") group blog that
Julian Dibbell was contributing to along with Cory Ondrejka, the CTO
of Linden Lab.

Given the path that led me to Second Life, I was saddened to hear
that the origin story of moderation in Second Life didn’t mention
it. Peter should have known that people wouldn’t read his epic Terms
of Service, but at least he tried to apply best practice. “A Rape In
Cyberspace” was already 10 years old when Second Life launched and
Linden Lab were talking to many of the pioneers who worked on early
virtual worlds. Philip should have known better, but pursued a
wishful, naive approach to moderation and Second Life ended up
learning a lot of lessons that had already been learned the hard way.

![Grey Goo](https://nwn.blogs.com/.a/6a00d8341bf74053ef0263e95f3f7a200b-pi "Grey Goo")

This wasn’t the only occasion that Second Life’s design was
optimistic, naive and didn’t give enough thought to how it might be
abused by bad actors. When I first visited San Francisco I hosted a
party on Russian Hill to get to know my colleagues only to end up
huddled in the living room with other engineers battling a plague of
[grey goo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gray_goo) spreading across
the grid that was enabled by an over-permissive API. The API allowed
scripted objects to self-replicate and so exponentially overwhelm
regions until firewalls of shut down simulators limited the spread and
space lasers were able to delete scripts to purge the world of the
menace. Shortly after I returned to the UK I woke up one morning to my
first encounter with the infamous
[Goatse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goatse.cx) image which a
resident had pasted across the world so that it would show up on the
live map that had been naively been added to the front page of
[secondlife.com](https://secondlife.com/) without enough thought about
how it might be abused.

Eventually Second Life’s moderation policies and processes got to a
good place (Robin Harper was one of the people I spoke to about best
practices for moderation when I was working on [building safety into
Oculus Venues](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ylN_Hr4Q-Ts)) but the
story of how moderation began in Second Life is one of missed
opportunities. We shouldn’t just laugh off Second Life’s failings as
the stories of swashbuckling hackers while at the same time pointing
fingers at the similar failings of the current efforts to build a
Metaverse. Multi-user virtual worlds were already 20 years old when
Second Life was built and many lessons had already been learned.

[“How To Build a
Metaverse”](https://www.wsj.com/podcasts/the-journal/introducing-how-to-build-a-metaverse/2016c79b-beb7-411d-9c5b-bb92afa3a528)
is incredibly entertaining and illuminating, but this part of the
story is a good example of how not to build a metaverse. You can’t
just read the fiction about virtual worlds and ignore the
non-fiction. You can’t just talk to people who built early virtual
worlds or hire them: you have to actually listen to them and apply the
lessons they learned.