Title: Meaningful Choices
Date: 2010-09-27 17:23
Tags: conference, fun, games, music, play, web
Slug: meaningful-choices

<div class="flex-video"><object width="400" height="300"> <param name="flashvars" value="offsite=true&lang=en-us&page_show_url=%2Fphotos%2Ftags%2Fthisisplayful%2Fshow%2F&page_show_back_url=%2Fphotos%2Ftags%2Fthisisplayful%2F&tags=thisisplayful&jump_to=&start_index="></param> <param name="movie" value="http://www.flickr.com/apps/slideshow/show.swf?v=71649"></param> <param name="allowFullScreen" value="true"></param><embed type="application/x-shockwave-flash" src="http://www.flickr.com/apps/slideshow/show.swf?v=71649" allowFullScreen="true" flashvars="offsite=true&lang=en-us&page_show_url=%2Fphotos%2Ftags%2Fthisisplayful%2Fshow%2F&page_show_back_url=%2Fphotos%2Ftags%2Fthisisplayful%2F&tags=thisisplayful&jump_to=&start_index=" width="400" height="300"></embed></object></div>

On Friday I jumped on the train to London to attend [Playful 2010][], a
one day conference put on by [mudlark][] of [World of Love][] fame.
Despite billing itself as a day of cross “disciplinary frolicking” and
featuring [designers][], [podcasts][], [discussions of narrative][],
[iphone augmented paper games][] and [Disco Snake][] the thing that
stood out for me was a thread running through the talks that addressed a
fundamental of game design: meaningful choices.

[Jonathan Smith][] talked about the dangers of giving people too much
freedom in his talk about the Lego Games. Lego is almost a shorthand for
freedom: the easy to understand system of knobs and anti-knobs that
allows 2 4x2 blocks to be combined in 9 million ways an ultimate sandbox
aspired to by games and virtual worlds like Second Life. This open, free
system led [Travellers Tales][] to add lots of open, free features to
it’s early Lego games that were largely ignored by players who need
boundaries and feedback from the game to determine ‘what I want versus
what’s expected of me’. Choosing freedom and rebellion is more
meaningful when it is clear that I am exercising my freedom and not
doing the expected.

[Margaret Robertson][] talked about and in the current sandbox game du
jour, [Minecraft][], which has enough terror and threat in its horror
filled night to make the choices made during the day meaningful and to
reward mastery of it’s sandbox — a sandbox that compelled Margaret to
stay up until early in the morning carving her slides out of earth,
building them out of wood and animating them with flowing water and
flames burning down the assertion that “games = points”.

It was this misguided assertion that [Sebastien Deterding][] talked
about in his look at the ‘gamification’ of the world around us. When all
that gamified web sites like foursquare do is allow the accumulation of
points and badges there are no meaningful choices, no mastery, no way to
rebel against expectations, no play and no fun. Gamification results in
loyalty schemes that are no more meaningful than [Progress Quest][].

The importance of being able to rebel against expectations was echoed by
[Alexis Kennedy’s][] talk about delicious misery in [Echo Bazaar][], a
social game that would be another meaningless progression to inevitable
success if it weren’t for contrarian missions that allow players to
opt-in to getting their characters exiled for scandal or driven insane
by demons. These missions inflict real harm on characters, but when
properly signposted are the most enjoyed and shared missions: allowing
players to be badass. When a game makes success inevitable, misery and
failure is play and meaningful escape.

Pat Kane, formerly of Hue and Cry and more recently author of [The Play
Ethic][] gave a fascinating talk about wordplay, humour and his journey
from disillusionment at the comedy industry, to fascination with humour
through the [Old Jews Telling Jokes’][] stories of Jews laughing in the
face of persecution. When misery and failure is inevitable, humour and
play is rebellion. An ultimate, meaningful demonstration of freedom and
humanity when all hope of victory is gone.

  [Playful 2010]: http://www.thisisplayful.com/
  [mudlark]: http://www.wearemudlark.com/
  [World of Love]: http://jimpurbrick.com/2010/06/26/world-love/
  [designers]: http://www.hellomuller.com/
  [podcasts]: http://shiftrunstop.co.uk/
  [discussions of narrative]: http://www.naomialderman.com/
  [iphone augmented paper games]: http://www.volumique.com/en/
  [Disco Snake]: http://jimpurbrick.com/2010/09/15/disco-snake/
  [Jonathan Smith]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jonathan_Smith_%28Traveller%27s_Tales%29
  [Travellers Tales]: http://www.ttgames.com/
  [Margaret Robertson]: http://lookspring.co.uk/
  [Minecraft]: http://www.minecraft.net/
  [Sebastien Deterding]: http://twitter.com/dingstweets
  [Progress Quest]: http://progressquest.com/
  [Alexis Kennedy’s]: http://twitter.com/alexiskennedy
  [Echo Bazaar]: http://echobazaar.failbettergames.com/
  [The Play Ethic]: http://www.theplayethic.com/
  [Old Jews Telling Jokes’]: http://jimpurbrick.com/feeds/atom/blog/www.oldjewstellingjokes.com
