Title: Music Again!
Date: 2009-01-12 20:42
Tags: audio, bending, bent, circuit, distortion, diy, feedback, music, stylophone, synth
Slug: music-again

Since moving to Brighton 18 months ago I’ve been pretty busy finding my
feet, moving house twice, sorting out schools and setting up Linden Lab
Brighton, so I haven’t had as much time to make music as I’d have liked.
It hasn’t helped that my brother Roo, who collaborated with me on
[Vanishing Trick][] has gone from being a medical student to an
opthalmologist, so has been pretty busy too.

</p>

I’ve still been reading [create digital music][] though, so couldn’t
resist buying Luke a copy of [Korg <span class="caps">DS</span>-10][]
for his birthday just before Christmas. It’s a great piece of software
that reminds me a lot of ReBirth (which is now [free][]!) — the same
infectious acid sounds and a fun interface that you can’t resist
tweaking. Within hours Luke was coming up with screaming synth noises
that would have made the Chemical Brothers proud, so I told him that
when he had a track finished we could record it on to the computer, add
some more sounds and make a <span class="caps">CD</span>.

</p>

30 minutes later I had Luke to thank for finally convincing me to unpack
my bag of midi and audio cables for the first time since we rolled up in
Brighton. While adding bits to Lukes <span class="caps">DS</span>-10 and
[Electroplankton][] creations, I took the opportunity to finally play
around with [Ableton Live][] properly and was completely bowled over.
It’s one of those pieces of software that as a software engineer you
can’t help admiring. It makes you want to use it and turns the complex
process of sequencing and producing music in to joyful fun. I’d been a
Cubase user for 10 years, but I’m not going back.

</p>

Over Christmas I put together a Live rig that lets me use my ancient
Yamaha <span class="caps">MFC05</span> <span class="caps">MIDI</span>
controller to switch between drum beats, record guitar loops and
automatically switch between effects settings without touching the
computer. With some tweaking I’m going to get it to do the same for my
[Nord Modular][] and switch patches on both the Nord and my
<span class="caps">POD</span> allowing me to quickly record, compose,
arrange and perform music from 5 foot pedals. I’ve also got
[<span class="caps">ITM</span>][] set up on my iPhone which I’m planning
to mount on my guitar giving me a wireless X/Y touchpad that can control
any number of Ableton parameters.

</p>

I also finally got round to playing around with circuit bending for the
first time. Last Christmas Roo got me a reissue Stylophone, which is a
fun toy, but whenever I read about circuit bending online I kept
thinking it would be fun to try connecting the headphone output of the
stylophone to the <span class="caps">MP3</span> input. In the end it
only took an hour or so of poking around inside the Stylophone while
telling Luke about electronics to find some bend points that turn the
mild mannered Stylophone in to a wailing banshee of feedback distortion
that’s more Hendrix than Harris. The modded Stylophone is shown below
and I’ve added annotations to a [picture of the opened up Stylophone on
Flickr][] that shows the points that I connected. If you’d like to hear
the evil sounds it makes there are a [selection of Creative Commons
licensed samples][] on Freesound, but I advise turning the volume down
and using headphones if you give them a listen.

<a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/jimpurbrick/3186312458/" title="Bent Stylophone by Jim Purbrick, on Flickr"><img src="http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3095/3186312458_eebac80a6e.jpg" width="500" height="334" alt="Bent Stylophone" /></a>

It’s great to be having fun making music again. Thanks Luke and Roo!

</p>

  [Vanishing Trick]: http://www.myspace.com/vanishingtrick
  [create digital music]: http://createdigitalmusic.com/
  [Korg <span class="caps">DS</span>-10]: http://www.aqi.co.jp/product/ds10/en/index.html
  [free]: http://www.rebirthmuseum.com/
  [Electroplankton]: http://electroplankton.nintendo-europe.com/enGB/index.html
  [Ableton Live]: http://www.ableton.com/
  [Nord Modular]: http://www.nordkeyboards.com/main.asp?tm=oldproducts&clpm=Nord_Modular
  [<span class="caps">ITM</span>]: http://www.itouchmidi.com/
  [picture of the opened up Stylophone on Flickr]: http://flickr.com/photos/jimpurbrick/3185471711/in/photostream/
  [selection of Creative Commons licensed samples]: http://www.freesound.org/packsViewSingle.php?id=4246
  [Bent Stylophone]: http://farm4.static.flickr.com/3095/3186312458_eebac80a6e.jpg
  [![Bent Stylophone][]]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/jimpurbrick/3186312458/
    "Bent Stylophone by Jim Purbrick, on Flickr"
