Title: New Widgets
Date: 2008-11-25 23:21
Tags: aggregation, independent, shopping, social, software, stuff, widgets, wishlist
Slug: new-widgets

It’s that time of year again where people start asking what I’d like for
Christmas and I start wondering what they’d like in return. It’s just
the sort of problem that should be solved with social software. Over the
last few years I’ve had an Amazon wish list which suffices for books,
music and software, but doesn’t allow me to add fun things like [board
games][], [sensors][] and [lego] (http://shop.lego.com/Default.aspx).

</p>

I’ve thought about building a wish list service that worked against any
web store a few times and was talking to my old friend Tom about this
problem at the weekend when he came to stay with his lovely new daughter
Beth. We both agreed that someone must have built it already and so it
goes: [boxedup][] provides you with browser buttons that allow you to
easily add any product any where on the web to a social wish list
service. It also supports the other essential feature — allowing your
friends to reserve items in a way that’s visible to them, but invisible
to you, so everything stays a surprise until the big day.

</p>

I’ve added a boxedup widget to the side bar so you can see what
interesting schwag I’ve uncovered from across the web in a
[wonderland][] style. While I was at it I added a [friendfeed][] widget
so you can see what I’m reading, bookmarking and uploading in a [simon
willison][]/[boingboing][] style too.

</p>

Now I just need to get everyone I know to set up a boxedup list too and
my Christmas shopping will do itself.

</p>

  [board games]: http://boardgameclub.co.uk/
  [sensors]: http://www.active-robots.com/
  [boxedup]: http://www.boxedup.com/
  [wonderland]: http://wonderlandblog.com/
  [friendfeed]: http://friendfeed.com/
  [simon willison]: http://simonwillison.net/
  [boingboing]: http://boingboing.net/
