Title: On Lifecycles And Spimes
Date: 2008-08-03 23:22
Tags: augmented, bruce, carbon, carbongoggles, emissions, reality, secondlife, spime, sterling
Slug: lifecycles-and-spimes

It was immensely satisfying to see [Bruce Sterling commenting on Carbon
Goggles][] in his [Beyond The Beyond blog for wired][] last week, not
only because I’m a big admirer of his work, but because his 4 year old
Spime neologism came up in the original discussions about Carbon Goggles
at EuroFOO 2 years ago.

</p>

[Sterling’s original description of Spimes][] make them sound extremely
sophisticated and active objects: recording and publishing information
about their construction and ownership, usage, possible modifications
and alerting owners about the need for maintainence and so on. Our
current reality is one of more passive objects which are annotated via
the web: despite being able to run web servers, the possibilities for
modifying [Linksys SLUGs][] are independently published on the web; the
lifecycles of passive books are tracked and determined using services
like [bookcrossing][] and [bookmooch][]. Everything is web enabled right
now: a subject I [gave a talk on at BarCamp Brighton last year][].

</p>

The current model relies on human identification and administration to
grease the wheels of dumb objects. We see a Linksys
<span class="caps">SLUG</span> and google to find out information about
it. We enter the information added to a bookcrossed book to find out
about it’s sequence of owners and route around the world. Augmented
reality takes a step towards automating the process: objects are still
passive, but <span class="caps">RFID</span> readers replace humans in
the identification of objects, automated processes pull information on
the object from external databases and augmented reality overlays
display the information over the object in a way that gives us x-ray
like abilities. We can see the details of the construction, components,
chemistry and recycling options for objects. Able to make visible the
invisible, to see the full picture beyond feature lists and prices.

</p>

Sterling talks about the “need to document the life cycles of objects”
and this was the original plan for Carbon Goggles. Everything from an
apple to a supercomputer has an Id in Second Life and so the goal was to
compare the carbon footprints of everything over it’s entire lifecycle.
The apple is cultivated using machine tools, transported, refrigerated
and stored and has a carbon footprint just like an object that actively
emits carbon like a motorcycle. In many cases the carbon costs of
creating and destroying objects can dwarf the carbon they emit in their
use. It can be more carbon efficient to buy a second hand car than to
buy a new hybrid, despite the later’s frugal emissions while in use.

</p>

Unfortunately collecting data on entire life cycles is incredibly
difficult. While people can measure the electricity usage of an
appliance and add it to the [<span class="caps">AMEE</span>][] wiki,
it’s much harder to find out the emissions produced by the entire chain
of companies that have built transported and assembled the myriad pieces
that produced that object. When I last met Gavin in London he told me
that the goal is for <span class="caps">AMEE</span> to provide this
complete lifecycle picture of everything, but we’re a long way off.
Environmental costs have been externalities outside company accounting
for a long time. <span class="caps">AMEE</span> intends to add this
missing accounting, but it’s tantamount to annexing every company’s
accounting process and is likely to be just as complex as counting the
pounds and pence.

</p>

In the future we will be able to automatically see everything there is
to know about everything around us and be fully aware of the impacts of
our consumption. Right now services like bookmooch, freecycle and
bookcrossing allow us to add Spime like intelligence to objects if we’re
prepared to do a lot of Spime wranging. Experiments like [Carbon
Goggles][] give us a glimpse of what the future in the real world might
look like. We’re going to be a lot more aware, which is lucky, because
we’re going to need to be.

</p>

  [Bruce Sterling commenting on Carbon Goggles]: http://blog.wired.com/sterling/2008/07/second-life-spe.html
  [Beyond The Beyond blog for wired]: http://blog.wired.com/sterling/
  [Sterling’s original description of Spimes]: http://www.viridiandesign.org/notes/401-450/00422_the_spime.html
  [Linksys SLUGs]: http://www.nslu2-linux.org/
  [bookcrossing]: http://www.bookcrossing.com/
  [bookmooch]: http://www.bookmooch.com/
  [gave a talk on at BarCamp Brighton last year]: http://www.slideshare.net/guestc3e35c/everything-is-web-enabled-right-now
  [<span class="caps">AMEE</span>]: http://www.amee.cc/
  [Carbon Goggles]: http://carbongoggles.org
