Title: Organisational Structures
Date: 2014-20-03 23:00
Tags: technology,management,startups
Slug: organisational-structures

There have been a number of
[blog](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/on-leadership/wp/2014/01/03/zappos-gets-rid-of-all-managers/)
[posts](http://www.oscon.com/oscon2013/public/schedule/detail/29555)
recently about exciting new organisational structures. As
[Cory](http://ondrejka.net/) [points
out](http://firstround.com/article/Facebook-VP-of-Engineering-on-Solving-Hard-Things-Early)
"Every early stage company thinks it has reinvented management": a
very dangerous belief when betting on a new organisational structure
can be much riskier than betting on the wrong product.

It starts innocently enough: version 1.0 has finally launched, early
adopters have arrived, the graphs are definitely starting to point
upward and it's time to hire.

Growing the company is the next challenge, but no one has spent the
last couple of years foregoing income and sleep to build another Acme
Corp., in fact no one believes that an Acme Corp. would have been
capable of launching version 1.0 which was clearly only possible due
to having a room full of smart people and no management.

So, the first course of action is to hire more smart people and
empower them to choose the right thing to do. This works for a while
but eventually the CEO can no longer keep track of what everyone's
doing and some things are falling through the cracks.

This is clearly a scaling problem, so a scalable system is
devised. Maybe everyone picks N tasks a week and votes on the most
important, maybe this is 2 years ago and some bonuses are sprinkled on
gamification style, or this is in 6 months time and some sharing
economy social mechanics are wedged in.

Like all alphas there are some wrinkles and so the system is tweaked
and iterated on, but now the organisational structure has become a
second product. While some people are enthusiastically hacking on the
organisation, they're not working on version 1.3 which is late. Other
people are frantically trying to get version 1.3 out of the door while
another no longer buys the new organisational structure and has cashed
in their last 2 years vacation along with the money they gamed from
the bonus system to pay for a month long holiday in the sun.

Eventually it becomes clear that fighting on two fronts is not
sustainable and the CEO decides to pivot to a more conventional
organisational structure to concentrate on getting version 1.4 out on
time. Some of the people who heroically got 1.3 out of the door would
make great managers, but by this time they have either already burned
out and left or are shopping their CVs to Acme Corp.

Luckily the product is still generating buzz, so a brace of
experienced managers can be drafted in, but this generates even more
organisational churn as some more of the smart people look up 4.5
years in to their 3 month project to discover that a lot of their
friends have left.

The organisational structure that looked like a trivial problem
compared to building version 1.0 results in version 2.0 never
shipping.

Getting product decisions wrong costs time and money. Getting
organisational decisions wrong burns even more valuable human capital
and goodwill. Engineers at startups expect to make product pivots, but
they don't expect to be alpha testing an ever-changing series of
organisational MVPs at the same time.

In many cases the ground breaking tech product and/or service is
mostly a clever combination of commodity hardware and open source
software connected to the internet and maintained by a small and
heroic ops team.

Similarly, the innovative company is often a clever combination of
existing organisational structures maintained by a small and heroic
management team.

![Organizational Charts](http://www.bonkersworld.net/images/2011.06.27_organizational_charts.png "Organizational Charts")
(via http://www.bonkersworld.net/)