Title: Osprey Therian
Date: 2013-12-15 23:50
Tags: secondlife, art, combatcards

In mid-2004 I first started exploring Second Life. Version 1.4 had
just been released and Philip Rosedale had said in the press release
["My fantasy is to be Uma Thurman in Kill Bill, and now I can. I'd pay
$10 for her yellow jumpsuit and sword moves and I'm sure other people
would too. Custom Animations are going to liberate the world of Second
Life in ways I'm sure I can't
imagine."](http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20040615005481/en/Life-3D-Online-World-Users-Power-Character). Plenty
of people responded by making sword fighting moves, but the software
and network latency in Second Life made actually having a satisfying
sword fight hard, so I decided to play around with Second Life's
scripting language, LSL, to see if I could build an interesting turn
based sword fighting game. Once I had a prototype up and running I
realized that it might be fun to turn it in to a trading card game and
so asked on the Second Life forums if anyone would like to help with
the artwork. [Osprey
Therian](https://my.secondlife.com/osprey.therian) replied.

I had no idea who Osprey was in real life, but in Second Life she was
friendly, funny, enthusiastic, determined and a ball of
energy. Together we photographed hundreds of avatars and Osprey turned
them in to georgous [Combat Cards](http://combatcards.wordpress.com/),
she created hilarious custom animations with rotating limbs for our
robot themed cards and dozens more to accomodate avatars curled up in
to a ball as tinies. We sold thousands of combat cards, made thousands
of real life dollars and ploughed some of that in to getting real life
Combat Cards printed which we sold for Linden Dollars using a vending
machine in Second Life. We built a community that met up every Sunday
to play Combat Cards and ran tournaments with every new release for
several years in
[Europa](http://maps.secondlife.com/secondlife/Europa/113/164/56). Much
of this was only possible thanks to the way that Osprey threw herself
in to the project with an energy, passion and determination and
commitment that I have rarely experienced in Second Life or real life.

We rarely talked about real life, mostly just meeting up in SL and
getting things done. Partly this was because started working for
Linden Lab and didn't want that to affect our relationship. Eventually
I let it slip somehow and Osprey confessed that she sort of knew
anyway, from various hints and things I'd mentioned over the
years. With that secret out we vaguely started making plans to meet up
in real life and in 2009 got the chance.

While visiting Linden Lab's Seattle office I hired a car and drove to
Olympia where a woman called Vivian Kendall, who I had never met
before, let me in to her house and made me a salad. In some ways it
was a very strange encounter. I wasn't a bald, yellow, Simpsons like
mad scientist, Osprey wasn't a rakish, swashbuckling rogue and we
weren't swordfighting, dancing or floating across Second Life in a hot
air balloon, but we knew each other. "You're just you", Vivian said as
we ate together. And Vivian was just Osprey. Much frailer in real
life, but full of the same energy and passion that spilled out across
Second Life. After lunch we looked at some of Vivian's real life
paintings and although she regretted not being able to paint any more
she talked enthusiastically about the second life that Second Life had
given her to create and socialize as her real life had closed
in. After an hour or so of chatting we took a picture, I left and we
went back to our second lives.

<a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/jimpurbrick/11392910546/" title="Osprey by Jim Purbrick, on Flickr"><img src="http://farm4.staticflickr.com/3833/11392910546_f0269f611a.jpg" width="500" height="500" alt="Osprey"></a>

I only heard about Vivian's passing a couple of hours ago via Joe
Miller and so I unfortunately missed her memorial yesterday, but I am
very grateful that I got to meet up with Osprey one last time to
celebrate Second Life's 10th birthday a few months ago. We talked
and danced, listened to music and Osprey showed off yet another
amazing Second Life avatar that looked incredibly life like until she
pushed a virtual button and made her feet enormous. It was perfect.

<a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/jimpurbrick/11393950825/" title="SL10B by Jim Purbrick, on Flickr"><img src="http://farm3.staticflickr.com/2847/11393950825_35fb43e6aa.jpg" width="500" height="267" alt="SL10B"></a>

Whenever people claim that [Second Life
failed](http://blog.ginsudo.com/2011/11/12/why-second-life-failed/) I
think of Osprey. Second Life allowed many of our lives to be enriched
by the wonderful Osprey Therian and provided her with a platform for
her creativity when painting in real life became impossible. That is
success enough for me. But Second Life was just the platform: the art,
energy, love, creativity and passion were Osprey's alone. I will miss
her enormously and remember our time making Combat Cards together
forever.