Title: #recordstoreday
Date: 2016-04-15
Tags: music,diy,storybird,point mass,music industry,culture,punk

<a data-flickr-embed="true"  href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/jimpurbrick/26178453420/in/dateposted-public/" title="StoryBirdAlbum"><img src="https://farm2.staticflickr.com/1465/26178453420_488f9407f8_o.jpg" width="600" height="800" alt="StoryBirdAlbum"></a><script async src="//embedr.flickr.com/assets/client-code.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

3 weeks ago I spent a few hours with photoshop working on the Story
Bird logo that Linda made a while ago to make it suitable for print. 2
weeks ago I spent a few hours researching the best way to convert the
24 bit 48 Khz Story Bird mixes to 16 bit 44.1 Khz audio files that
could be burned to CD. 1 week ago I went to Maplins in Tottenham Court
Road, bought a cake of printable CD-Rs, dusted off my old MacBook Pro
and spent the weekend burning copies of the [Story
Bird](http://storybird.band/) album. Tomorrow the CDs will go on sale
at [The Marwood Coffee Shop](http://www.themarwood.com/) in Brighton
for
[#recordstoreday](https://twitter.com/hashtag/recordstoreday?lang=en-gb).

The whole process felt fun, quaint, cute, anachronistic, nostalgic,
and absurd. The last time I burned CDs was 3 years ago, when I made a
few copies of the [100 Robots
Sustain](https://100robots.bandcamp.com/album/sustain) album for
friends. My current MacBook Pro doesn't have an optical drive, let
alone a CD writer. The CD player in our living room hasn't worked for
years. I ripped out CD colleciton to MP3 a decade ago when we still
lived in Nottingham and needed to make space for our new family. Until
I tested the Story Bird CDs, the last 2 operational CD players in our
house haven't played a CD in months. It's great to see real, physical
copies of the album I've spent the last 6 months working on. The CDs
sound great and the hand printed covers look amazing and make each
copy a unique collectors item. Hopefully some people will buy some of
the CDs tomorrow, but as with the piles of vinyl sold tomorrow on
\#recordstoreday they will mostly serve as limited edition souvenirs.

\#recordstoreday promotes collecting records just as the comic book day
 that inspired it promotes collecting comics. Fetishising obsolete
 formats is harmless fun, but discovering new music and supporting
 musicians is important. On the 23rd of April, once you've filed away
 the limited edition vinyl you queued overnight to buy on
 \#recordstoreday, spend some time in the comfort of your own home
 downloading some amazing music on [#bandcampday](https://twitter.com/hashtag/bandcampday?lang=en-gb).