Title: Sharing Carbon Goggles Visualisations
Date: 2008-07-08 23:01
Tags: carbongoggles, machinima, secondlife, video, vimeo, visualisation
Slug: sharing-carbon-goggles-visualisations

Second Life has benefited greatly from growing in popularity alongside
video sharing services. Many people’s first glimpse of Second Life or a
particular Second Life experience is through the lens of a YouTube
video. When promoting real world brands in Second Life, videos of the
Second Life experience that can be viewed by a wider audience on the web
are often an important part of the campaign. Even for experienced
residents like me, it’s often a video posted on [New World Notes][] that
inspires me to fire up the Second Life viewer to take a look at an
amazing new build or experience.

</p>

The goal of the Carbon Goggles [demo][] and [tutorial][] videos was to
make it clear what Carbon Goggles do and how to use them, but videos are
also a great way to make the Carbon Goggles visualisations themselves
available to a wider audience on the web. As well as being an ambient
augmented reality application that allows Second Life residents to
passively learn about real world carbon costs, Carbon Goggles can be
used to quickly create images and videos that illustrate real
world emissions.

</p>

If you annotate new objects with carbon emission data using Carbon
Goggles, please consider recording some footage of the newly annotated
objects and adding it to the Carbon Goggles [vimeo group][]. I’ve added
a vimeo badge to [carbongoggles.org][] to show the newest videos. As
well as allowing Carbon Goggles users to share the locations of
annotated objects in Second Life, carbongoggles.org now shares
visualisations of carbon emissions data to everyone on the web.

</p>

  [New World Notes]: http://nwn.blogs.com "New World Notes"
  [demo]: http://www.vimeo.com/1236194 "Carbon Goggles Demo Video"
  [tutorial]: http://www.vimeo.com/1230212
    "Carbon Goggles Tutorial Video"
  [vimeo group]: http://www.vimeo.com/groups/carbongoggles
    "Carbon Goggles Vimeo Group"
  [carbongoggles.org]: http://carbongoggles.org
