Title: Small Places Loosely Joined
Date: 2020-09-23 16:51
Tags: MMORPG, SocialVR, Second Life, EVE Online
Slug: small-places-loosely-joined

![Untitled](https://live.staticflickr.com/4648/39932572994_0a01abd6b6_b.jpg "Untitled")

Over the last few years I’ve spent a lot of time helping people new to
virtual worlds learn how they work. Over the next few weeks I’m
sharing a series of short posts on some of the high level concepts I
covered which will hopefully be useful to other people new to virtual
worlds. [The previous
post](https://jimpurbrick.com/2020/09/16/a-tall-dark-stranger/) talked
about how you can make sure everyone can create an avatar
representation that they feel properly expresses them within a virtual
world, this post talks about how you can structure the world so that
everyone can move around easily to find everything that they want.

[Second Life](https://secondlife.com/) always aspired to be the
Metaverse, but in the beginning it was more like a neighbourhood. The
first regions were named after streets in SoMa and, like the district
in San Francisco, people took walking tours from one corner of the
world to another, flew biplanes across the sky and sailed on the
simulated winds around the bay. However you decided to travel in the
early days you could see the whole world in a few hours, so[ Philip
Rosedale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philip_Rosedale) became very
excited when he realised one day that the constant tsunami of content
generated by Second Life's residents had grown so large that the world
was changing too fast to see everything.

As the Second Life continued to expand and change at an ever faster
rate it became increasingly important to have ways to find the good
stuff. Bookmarks, searches and external blogs indexed the expanding
world helping people find things. Rather than walk, fly or sail around
the world people would teleport from place to place or event to
event. Even if you wanted to walk it became increasingly hard to do
so: more and more parcels of land became private, restricting entry to
both people and any[ scripted
fish](https://nwn.blogs.com/nwn/2005/06/evolving_nemo.html) unlucky
enough to try to swim across the boundary.

While you could still plot every parcel on a map which grew to the
size of Denmark and looked like a huge series of fjords, as more and
more people wanted a beach front property, the world effectively
became a graph of experiences which people teleported between. The
seamless, endless world that descriptions of the Metaverse conjure up
and that Linden Lab aimed to build ended up being a graph of
bite-sized experiences linked together like a web.

Technologically, Second Life also began to split at the seams. The
addition of Second Life URLs
([SLurls](https://community.secondlife.com/knowledgebase/english/landmarks-teleporting-and-slurls-r54/#Section__2))
allowed blogs to link to locations in Second Life and people
increasingly wrote scripts which published out to the web and[
Twitter](http://wiki.secondlife.com/wiki/Twitter_OAuth_Library) or
pulled data in from the web to[ visualize in
3D](https://nwn.blogs.com/nwn/2007/03/diggnifying_sec.html). A lot of
people would keep a browser tab open showing the presence information
published to the web and would teleport to their friends as soon as
they saw them come online. Developers wrote applications on web
servers which used Second Life scripts just to build user interfaces
so they could escape the limitations of the in-world scripting
platform. People captured 3D geometry sent to their graphics cards to
provide 3D printing services or circumvent in-world DRM to produce
knock-off virtual goods. Companies like IBM lobbied Linden Lab for
legitimate ways to host their own private regions while open source
developers forged ahead to produce alternative clients and servers
that anyone could run. Despite much concern, these efforts mostly
provided developers with more convenient development sandboxes: the
[content, community, conversation and
commerce](https://jimpurbrick.com/2020/09/09/the-conversation-around-content/)
stayed on the Linden Lab hosted grid.

Towards the end of my time at Linden Lab there was a push to[
standardize these
efforts](http://wiki.secondlife.com/wiki/Open_Grid_Protocol) and make
it possible for experiences run by different organisations,
potentially on different technology stacks, to inter-operate. For
people to teleport not just between regions, but between organisations
taking their appearance and inventory of clothes, animations, and
interactive objects which defined their identity with them. This was a
big deal, so it was incredibly encouraging to see some of the earliest
experiments in social VR at Oculus try something similar by linking
Oculus Rooms to other experiences via[ coordinated app
launch](https://developer.oculus.com/documentation/platform/latest/concepts/dg-cc-cordapplaunch/)
(CAL). While the first CAL implementations linked Oculus Rooms to a
fixed set of published experiences it's easy to imagine people using
similar technology to build environments which link to their favorite
locations around the Metaverse just as early web sites curated links
to favourite content around the web.

When we think about the Metaverse it is easy to jump to images of
endless wonders teaming with multitudes stretching to a distant
horizon. Linden Lab dreamed similar dreams and went to extraordinary
lengths to make Second Life appear seamless, but much of that effort
could have been more profitably spent enabling a universe of small
places, loosely joined. Several social worlds that followed Second
Life including[ Metaplace](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metaplace),[
Whirled ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whirled)and Linden Lab's own[
Sansar ](https://www.sansar.com/)all learned this lesson by building
collections of linked experiences rather than a single space
containing everything. Linking experiences also makes it easier to
support requirements like IBM's need to host their own servers, build
experiences which require custom clients to support new or specialized
hardware or weave existing applications which may have been built on
different engines into a broader Metaverse. As we think about building
new Metaverses, it's important not to just think about how we can
bring everything into our worlds and make them stretch out to
infinity, but also about how to connect experiences and technologies
together and allow people to move and connect between them.

(Second Life screenshot:[ Ella
Pinellapin](https://www.flickr.com/photos/ellapinellapin/39932572994/))