Title: Super Hyperpolyglot
Date: 2012-05-05 19:03
Tags: c++, data, free, java, javascript, languages, programming, python, reference, spreadsheet
Slug: super-hyperpolyglot

A few years ago nearly all the code I wrote was in C++, but increasingly
I’m finding myself writing in a variety of mostly C-style languages and
having to perform crunching mental gear changes as I switch
between them.

</p>

In the interests of making these language switches less painful I
thought about listing the commonly used features of the languages I
commonly use in a side-by-side format. Luckily I’m a lazy programmer,
the web is large and there’s nothing new under the sun, so I quickly
found [Hyperpolyglot][] which provides commonly used programming
language features in a side-by-side format, which is what I
wanted. Nearly.

</p>

Hyperpolyglot organizes it’s language comparisons in to several
catagories: scripting languages, C++ family languages, embeddable
languages and so on. In my case (and I suspect in many cases) the
languages I wanted to compare were spread across several pages.

</p>

After briefly considering some cut and paste to get what I wanted I
started playing with Google Spreadsheets, which has a very nifty
importHtml function which allowed me to pull the Hyperpolyglot data in
to several sheets which can be combined to produce arbitrary
language comparisons.

</p>

It’s not perfect as different languages have different features and in
some cases the Hyperpolyglot data doesn’t use exactly the same terms
across tables (“version used” vs “versions used”) and I’m not a
spreadsheet ninja, but it’s good enough to generate PDFs like this
[JavaScript Python Java C++ Comparision][]. As a Hyperpolyglot
derivative work, The [Super Hyperpolyglot Spreadsheet][] is licensed
under the [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 License][],
please let me know if you improve it.

</p>

  [Hyperpolyglot]: http://hyperpolyglot.org/
  [JavaScript Python Java C++ Comparision]: http://jimpurbrick.com/media/SuperHyperpolyglotJavaScriptPythonJavaCPP.pdf
  [Super Hyperpolyglot Spreadsheet]: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0Ahc1HVbwPgp0dDBTTTlOV0VtU21iazVwU1ptMmdScVE
  [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 License]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
