Title: The Conversation Around Content
Date: 2020-09-09 21:51
Tags: MMORPG, SocialVR, Second Life, EVE Online
Slug: the-conversation-around-content

![Okinawa](https://live.staticflickr.com/1774/29966478168_f82b129a8a_b.jpg "Okinawa")

Over the last few years I’ve spent a lot of time helping people new to
virtual worlds learn how they work. Over the next few weeks I’m going
to share a series of short posts on some of the high level concepts I
covered which will hopefully be useful to other people new to virtual
worlds. This first post talks about ways in which you can fill an
entire world with things to keep everyone interested forever.

Whenever I visited[ Linden Lab](https://www.lindenlab.com/)’s San
Francisco office while I was building[ Second
Life](https://secondlife.com/) there was always a copy of[ Snow
Crash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snow_Crash) in the restroom. We
were definitely building the[
Metaverse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metaverse) and so there was
much excitement when one of our colleagues met[ Neal
Stephenson](https://l.workplace.com/l.php?u=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.nealstephenson.com%2F&h=AT0FNz9jjGQN7Emx_pyY0lfkHsVKPzMxRC33jX-KNSdGIHZ4VVcQJkXjbTFyJXuEcf3zhJv_6KS5SDITvayIMQou8j1ILEBitrcDgkOOPPAEo8f63HYnhKws2Y_ppSv0hVrGjIep1Gc04WSt)
and asked what he thought of Second Life. Neal commented that he
didn’t expect a company to set out to build the entire Metaverse, he
thought it would be more interstitial. Over a decade later I think
Neal’s comment is very relevant as several organisations contemplate
building the Metaverse.

Oculus currently provides content, but the conversation happens
elsewhere. Some people enjoy content in[ Oculus
Venues](https://www.facebook.com/VenuesOculus/) and then go to[ Oculus
Rooms](https://www.oculus.com/experiences/go/1101959559889232/) to
hang out afterwards, but most of the conversation happens on sites
like Reddit and Facebook. Oculus provides content but the spaces where
the conversation happens exist on the web.

Successful[ Massively Multiplayer Online
Games](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massively_multiplayer_online_game)
(MMOs) provide content as well as space for conversation. Games
companies typically spend years creating content which is voraciously
consumed within a few months. It is typically impossible to build
content as fast as it is consumed, so it is crucial that the content
promotes communication between players so that relationships form and
the world becomes a forum for conversation. The model is similar to a
virtual theme park: it is impossible for people to continuously ride
on new roller coasters all day and so the park around the rides
becomes important. Disneyland is the conversation in the queue as much
as the ride itself. Games companies hope that by the time people have
completed all the quests, they have made friends and that the virtual
world is the natural place to continue to hang out with those friends.

Unlike static theme parks, some MMOs provide a more open sandbox which
allows people to have a bigger impact on the world and so define more
of the content themselves. A good example is[
EVE](https://l.workplace.com/l.php?u=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.eveonline.com%2F&h=AT1CXJTxf0eVnC2Yyw_DwgMvpOjJ0jA8d_u1czsQn8l6-D-QCd2ahsBurLVpL-60-98IjL2FXvoV12dShc0KqQ1ajOkVCcMb0Fch6T2RAzchrDC_7pQr80GT1eOj43wTp6whe2_b0mLAG74Z)
which allows players to build enormous empires via trade, industry,
conquest and espionage. The continuing power struggles fuel a rich
continuing conversation around the player created content and a
history which is just as real as any other human history.

Other virtual worlds like Second Life rely almost completely on user
generated content. Linden Lab builds a software platform, rents out
virtual space and provides customer services, but builds very little
content itself. In the early days of Second Life content creation was
itself the content around which conversation formed. People would
build in virtual sandboxes and others would swing by to see what they
were building and ask how it was done. As more people began creating
content it quickly became impossible to see everything, which enabled
more content and conversation as people shared their favourite spots,
curated exhibitions and shared links on the web.

Each of these approaches has advantages and disadvantages. The
traditional MMO approach provides accessible, high quality content and
builds community around it, but has to focus on broad, mainstream
tastes to ensure that the limited content appeals as broadly as
possible. It results in a theme park full of content that appeals to
lots of people for a limited amount of time. Even with the resources
to appeal to every taste, would a[
Disneyland](https://l.workplace.com/l.php?u=https%3A%2F%2Fdisneyland.disney.go.com%2F&h=AT1t0mkcdjl4DZUxJWcxv78bmE_s7QQ9SgKv9p6jIgkFZ5BM2NXHJu2MvWW99PNJalAn7HKUvtsMNKH5Z4PAPr5DEB0BPQPzv-wEq8pi1euciPFYnUp9O6szHW-UrA477MYJ4yIpn34MxWrr)
punk rock club really be punk? The sandbox approach creates a much
greater feeling of ownership, investment and constant evolution, but
while[ Burning
Man](https://l.workplace.com/l.php?u=https%3A%2F%2Fburningman.org%2F&h=AT322TI-smX-jMuYJ28_Fu0EyQtGRPmYhwi135EPjqD3XK7Bd4pOqwPPktj2x_mpe-8eGtlT-vjFvVpZz6s-Foch01YgdRYd73oefzL-MG5WbYLNukKXf0hGAlwt07Z434CdhJ_rMjTV5RI7)
is an impressive achievement it’s not clear that many people would
want to live there all year.

If you’re thinking about building the Metaverse can you learn lessons
from the past to build an appealing space for as broad an audience as
possible? Can you build somewhere with a core of high quality, broadly
appealing commissioned content surrounded by a constantly changing
vibrant fringe of more niche experiences like the [Edinburgh
Festival](https://l.workplace.com/l.php?u=https%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FEdinburgh_Festival_Fringe&h=AT2ASEcsTf1P12JDILo0Cx6g9Zy1X7RljJkSCYn3jeRQSc7XOk58EINJh57vHtPN-DjrubMa-LgUtixEt-wLHjgRLtXTLek6ou_OtqBhvNnXkF7fkAq8X0g2CoYfenxd3audgkPXhEPCCHBY)
which people can safely explore? Can you provide space for content,
conversation and commerce which allows people to be heroes,
protagonists and entrepreneurs as well as visitors to a theme park?
Can you leave the right spaces around our content for people to
contribute comments, conversation, curation, communities,
collaboration and commerce? Can your Metaverse support services in the
spaces between the content just as services grew in the interstices in
the web?

(Second Life screenshot:[Ella Pinellapin](https://www.flickr.com/photos/ellapinellapin/29966478168/))
