Title: 2Â² Decades
Date: 2017-04-20
Tags: life, music, vr, technology
Slug: 2-2-decades

Several years ago when we were in [100 robots](http://100robots.com/)
together, [Max](https://twitter.com/toastkid) was celebrating his 40th
birthday. When I said that mine would be in 2017, it felt like an
impossibly far future date, but, after what feels like the blink of an
eye, here we are.

Along with many other lovely gifts I received this morning was a book
with the subtitle [Whatever happened to Generation X? by Tiffanie
Darke](http://www.harpercollins.ca/9780008185329/now-we-are-40)
complete with a bright yellow acid house cover and a quote by Douglas
Coupland on the cover.

I'll read the book when I go to Simon and Pinar's wedding next month,
but I'll share my immediate reaction now. Despite the term being
popularised by [Coupland's
book](https://www.coupland.com/books/generation-x-tales-for-an-accelerated-culture),
whatever did happen to generation X we won't read it in a book. We'll
read and write about it on the web we built.

While I remember my parents freaking out when I wanted to wear a
bright yellow acid house badge to school, at the time I was more in to
loud guitar music like [Nirvana](http://www.nirvana.com/) and
[Blur](http://www.blur.co.uk/). From the perspective of loud guitars
it felt like I'd missed the party: Metalica's [Master of
Puppets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Master_of_Puppets) was already
receading in to the rear view mirror and [Led
Zeppelin](http://www.ledzeppelin.com/) firmly in my parents era. While
we didn't have [The Beatles](www.thebeatles.com) though, I did have
computers.

There are plenty of people who would argue that I missed the boat
there too: [Boolean
algebra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_algebra) was developed
in 1848; the [Halting
Problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halting_problem) proved to be
undecidable over Turing machines in 1936 and
[Quicksort](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quicksort) was developed in
1959. While the [Infer](http://fbinfer.com/) team refused to give up
at the halting problem and are now producing amazing real world
results using static analysis, a lot of computer science was finished
before I was born.

My kind of computers weren't huge machines crunching numbers and doing
maths though, they were small pieces loosely joined. Connecting to
things and each other they didn't operate on maths, but changed the
world or built new ones. They automated my physics experiments so that
I could spend more time kissing Ali in the common room, helped
[reverse engineer Grand Theft Auto
maps](https://www.fileplanet.com/16253/10000/fileinfo/Junction-25-Beta)
and [automated synthesiser
parameters](http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/014892600559155#.WPlHtVPyvdQ)
when I didn't have real controls for them.

They let me record [hours](https://storybird.bandcamp.com/releases) of
[music](https://pointmass.bandcamp.com/) and made writing books,
making films and recording music accessible to everyone. While that
made lives harder for those trying to make a living from their art it
helped many more lives flourish. Napster may have made Metallica
pretty upset, but the french horn player from my school could plunder
the past for [funk loops to accompany his
synthesisers](https://www.discogs.com/artist/6754-Artemis).

The DIY explosion gave us hip-hop and a million flavours of dance
music and the networks to share it. Eventually it also gave us digital
versions of the Beatles and, now I have been able to download and
listen to it all, I'm convinced they have nothing to top the [Aphex
Twin](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MdZs5PVcwBs).

The same democratization of tools meant that as a software engineer I
could scratch an itch and choose to build my own service on top of
world class open source software or work for one of the companies that
became huge making the web easier to use. I've seen enough of how the
startup sausage is made to know that a lot of the glitter is not gold,
but owning the means of production means I at least have the choice to
strike out on my own.

Climate change may mean that our real world horizons are closer and
the piles of stuff we collect smaller, but the virtual vistas we can
explore are ever growing.

When I watch my children grow up with
[YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/) it's amazing to think about what
they will accomplish in the future. If they want to do something, they
watch it, learn it and do it. Nothing is unknown and nothing is
impossible. They're incredible, which is lucky, as together we're
going to have to save the world.

These thoughts are my own. They don't represent my employer. They
don't attempt to speak for my generation. I write them and share them
because I can and because I want to. Someone might read them and
comment on them or link to them to build a web. Thats how my
generation works and that's what we built. We may not have had the
Beatles, but I'm OK with that.