Title: You're The Boss 2
Date: 2011-09-12 22:53
Tags: brighon, children, diy, education, games, make, maker faire, shmup
Slug: youre-boss-2

<a href="http://sandbox.yoyogames.com/games/185178-youre-the-boss-2"><img src="http://sandbox.yoyogames.com/extras/image/name/san2/223/476223/original/screenshot2.jpg" title="You're The Boss 2 Screenshot" alt="You're The Boss 2 Screenshot"/></a>

A week ago over 5000 people streamed through the foyer of the Brighton
Dome to see and build hundreds of amazing things at the first [Brighton
Mini Maker Faire][]. Luke and I went along with 2 laptops, a scanner and
a pile of pens, paper, glue and scissors to make a video game with what
felt like most of those 5000 people.

We arrived at 9:30 in the morning and were still working out how to plug
out laptop in to the big plasma screen when the doors opened at 10:00.
From then until the doors closed at 17:00 our table was a tornado of
cutting, gluing, drawing and colouring as dozens of children and adults
dived in to the task of drawing bosses for our shoot ‘em up with wild
abandon. For a while my picture scanning, data wrangling and game
copying efforts kept up with the stream of submissions and people were
delighted to see their creations flying around on the big screen within
minutes of their creation. Soon enough though, the stream turned in to a
deluge and by midday I had a sizable backlog of pictures to process.

Despite working non-stop all day with only a 20 minute break to grab a
milk shake and have a quick look around I ended up with a backlog of
dozens of pictures at the end of the day. At that point another problem
emerged: the game is designed to slowly get harder at each level, but
with so many bosses to add the game would get impossibly hard before
half of the bosses were seen. Realizing that I had a lot more work to do
before the game would be finished I released an initial version at the
end of the faire and collapsed in an exhausted heap at the after party.

All of this is by way of being a long winded explanation as to why
“You’re The Boss 2” wasn’t finished a week ago. Last night I finally got
around to scanning in all of the remaining images, tweaked the
difficulty curve to make it possible to get to the end and released
“You’re The Boss 2 Extended” which can now be downloaded [here][You're
The Boss 2 Screenshot].

Despite being one of the most exhausting days of my life, it was also
one of the most enjoyable. It was incredibly rewarding seeing dozens of
children and adults alike delighting in creating something fun together
and watching [Thomas Truax][] perform with his
<span class="caps">DIY</span> instruments while talking to a
professional gingerbread house maker made for a truly magical end to the
day. I’m very proud to have been part of the first ever Brighton
(not-so) Mini Maker Faire and look forward to taking part in many more
(although I might bring along a friend to help next time!).

I hope you enjoy playing You’re The Boss 2 as much as we enjoyed
making it.

  [You're The Boss 2 Screenshot]: http://sandbox.yoyogames.com/extras/image/name/san2/223/476223/original/screenshot2.jpg
    "You're The Boss 2 Screenshot"
  [You're The Boss 2 Screenshot]: http://sandbox.yoyogames.com/games/185178-youre-the-boss-2
  [Brighton Mini Maker Faire]: http://www.makerfairebrighton.com/
  [Thomas Truax]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U73hX7cEO7Y
